>> Sreenivasan: SOME TIME SOON,
YOU COULD HAVE YOUR FACE SCANNED
AS YOU BOARD AN OVERSEAS FLIGHT.
IT'S ALREADY BEING TESTED IN A
HANDFUL OF AMERICAN AIRPORTS,
WITH TWO AIRLINES-- DELTA AND
JETBLUE-- DIRECTLY
PARTICIPATING.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY SEES THIS SYSTEM AS A
TOOL TO CATCH IMMIGRANTS
OVERSTAYING THEIR VISAS.
BUT AS THE PROGRAM EXPANDS, IT
WILL TAKE PHOTOS NOT JUST OF
FOREIGNERS BUT U.S. CITIZENS, AS
WELL.
THIS RAISES SECURITY, ACCURACY
AND PRIVACY QUESTIONS.
JOINING ME NOW FROM HOUSTON TO
DISCUSS THIS IS ASSOCIATED PRESS
REPORTER FRANK BAJAK.
FRANK, FIRST OF ALL, JUST LAY
OUT THIS EXPERIMENT, OR LAY OUT
HOW THIS IS ROLLING OUT FOR
US.
>> WELL, INTERESTINGLY, IT'S NOT
REALLY AN EXPERIMENT BECAUSE THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
SAYS THAT IT INTENDS TO GO AHEAD
WITH THIS AT ALL HIGH-VOLUME
AIRPORTS BEGINNING IN 2018.
NOW, THIS IS A PROGRAM THAT
STARTED OUT AS APPLYING ONLY TO
WHAT THEY CALL NON-IMMIGRANT
FOREIGNERS-- AND THAT'S, LIKE,
50 MILLION PEOPLE WHO VISIT THE
UNITED STATES ANNUALLY-- TO MAKE
SURE THAT THEY'RE NOT
OVERSTAYING VISAS AND TO KEEP
BETTER TRACK OF THAT.
CONGRESS HAS NOT EXPLICITLY
APPROVED THIS FOR U.S. CITIZENS,
BUT CUSTOMS AND BORDER
PROTECTION, WHICH IS PART OF
HOMELAND SECURITY, SAYS THAT
THEY CAN ONLY DO THIS IF THEY DO
IT FOR EVERYONE, INCLUDING U.S.
CITIZENS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT HAPPENS
TO THIS INFORMATION?
SAY I TAKE MY PHOTO, OR THE
AIRLINES TAKE MY PHOTO, OR
C.P.B. GETS MY PHOTO.
WHERE DOES IT GO?
>> WELL, FIRST OF ALL, EVERY
U.S. CITIZEN NOW HAS IN THEIR
PASSPORT A LITTLE CHIP THAT HAS
THE BIOMETRIC INFORMATION.
IT HAS THEIR BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION, WHERE THEY LIVE,
ET CETERA, THEIR BIRTH DATE.
AND IT'S GOT A PHOTO WHICH IS
ENCODED IN THAT CHIP.
IT CAN USE THAT INFORMATION TO
COMPARE IT AGAINST, SAY,
OUTSTANDING ARREST WARRANTS.
BASICALLY, IF SOMEONE IS WANTED
FOR A CRIME.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS IT'S NOT
GOING TO RETAIN THIS
INFORMATION, IT'S NOT GOING TO
KEEP RECORDS OF THIS
INFORMATION, BUT THE BORDER
PATROL OFFICIAL I SPOKE TO SAID
THAT THEY'RE NOT PRECLUDING THAT
IN THE FUTURE THEY COULD RETAIN
THAT INFORMATION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
THE ACCURACY OF THESE IMAGES,
THESE IMAGE RECOGNITION?
LET'S SAY YOU GET CAUGHT IN KIND
OF A FACE SCAN TRAP AND THERE'S
A FLAG, BUT IT'S... IT'S A CASE
OF MISTAKEN IDENTITY.
>> WELL, FACIAL RECOGNITION
TECHNOLOGY IS STEADILY IMPROVING
OVER THE YEARS.
AND IT'S NOW... THE BEST OF IT
IS AT 90% TO 95% ACCURACY.
HOWEVER, THE EXPERTS THAT I
TALKED TO SAID THAT THERE ARE
APT TO BE MISMATCHES.
AND IF THERE IS A MISMATCH, WHAT
CAN HAPPEN?
FIRST OF ALL, IT CAN CAUSE
TRAVELING DELAYS.
IF YOU'RE BOARDING AN
INTERNATIONAL FLIGHT OF 500
PASSENGERS, YOU'RE LOOKING AT UP
TO 50 PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING TO
GET STOPPED AND HAVE TO GO
THROUGH A MANUAL CHECK.
BUT THE ISSUE IS ALSO ON THAT
MISMATCH, WHAT IF I'VE GOT AN
IDENTICAL TWIN WHO'S A WANTED
FUGITIVE?
WELL, IS THAT GOING TO FLAG ME?
>> Sreenivasan: I KNOW IN THE
PAST THERE WERE SOME CONCERNS
THAT THESE ALGORITHMS AREN'T
VERY GOOD AT IDENTIFYING OR
MISIDENTIFYING WOMEN OR PEOPLE
OF COLOR BECAUSE OF THE SAMPLE
SET THAT THEY USED.
>> INDEED, THAT'S TRUE.
IN FACT, THERE'S A RESEARCHER AT
M.I.T. MEDIA LAB WHO'S LOOKED
INTO THIS, AND HE SAYS THAT
THERE IS A BIAS AGAINST PEOPLE
OF COLOR BECAUSE OF THE
SELECTION IN TESTS THAT'S BEEN
USED.
BUT I THINK THAT THE BIGGER
QUESTION THAT CONCERNS THE
PRIVACY EXPERTS IS, IT'S VERY
EASY TO QUICKLY NOW COMPARE
THESE TO THE FACE PRINTS OF
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE FROM
OTHER DATABASES INSTANTANEOUSLY,
AND I THINK THAT THIS IS THE
WORRY.
>> Sreenivasan: FRANK BAYAK
FROM THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
JOINING US FROM HOUSTON TODAY.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.